feat: sigstore/cosign support (#107)
sse-secure-systems/connaisseur: setup/COSIGN.md

# Using Connaisseur with Cosign signatures

> [Sigstore](https://sigstore.dev/) is a [Linux Foundation](https://linuxfoundation.org/) project that aims to provide public software signing and transparency to improve open source supply chain security. As part of the Sigstore project, [Cosign](https://github.com/sigstore/cosign) allows seamless container signing, verification and storage. You can read more about it [here](https://blog.sigstore.dev/cosign-signed-container-images-c1016862618?gi=95796f563c9f).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Sigstore](https://sigstore.dev/) is a [Linux Foundation](https://linuxfoundation.org/) project that aims to provide public software signing and transparency to improve open source supply chain security. As part of the Sigstore project, [Cosign](https://github.com/sigstore/cosign) allows seamless container signing, verification and storage. You can read more about it [here](https://blog.sigstore.dev/cosign-signed-container-images-c1016862618).
```

Remove tracking parameter.

Author: duh...newb mistake :facepalm:

> As a first step, we have implemented the elementary function of verifying `cosign` generated signatures against the locally created corresponding public keys. We plan to expose further features of cosign in upcoming releases, so stay tuned!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Connaisseur supports the elementary function of verifying `cosign`-generated signatures against the locally created corresponding public keys. We plan to expose further features of cosign in upcoming releases, so stay tuned!
```

## Demo

> ![](../img/co-nny-sign.gif)

Reviewer: I wonder if this filename will later be understood.

## Signing Container Images with Cosign

Getting started with `cosign` is very well described in the [docs](https://github.com/sigstore/cosign). Please check there for detailed instructions. In short: After installation a keypair is generated via:

```bash
cosign generate-key-pair
```

> You will be prompted to enter a password and a private (`cosign.key`) and public (`cosign.pub`) key are created. You can then use cosign to sign a container image using:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will be prompted to enter a password, after which a private (`cosign.key`) and public (`cosign.pub`) key are created. You can then use cosign to sign a container image using:
```

```bash
# Here, <IMAGE> is REPOSITORY/IMAGE_NAME:TAG
cosign sign -key cosign.key <IMAGE>
```

You can then verify the created signature via:

```bash

> cosign verify -key cosign.pub <IMAGE>

Reviewer: I'd prefer `$IMAGE`, as `<` and `>` have special shell meaning.

```

## Verification with Connaisseur

> Setting up Connaisseur (or short: `conny`) for `cosign` signatures only requires minor changes. In case of questions, please refer to the [default guide](README.md). In essence, you can just clone this repository:

Reviewer 2: wouldn't name Connaisseur by it's nickname in the official docs

Author: actually a bigger fan of the nickname than the real name bc it is way too long and confuses people, but will do

Author: duly done :disappointed:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/sse-secure-systems/connaisseur.git
cd connaisseur
```

Next, configure `Connaisseur` to use cosign and the previously created public key for validation via the `helm/values.yaml`.  To do so, copy your `cosign.pub` key into `notary.rootPubkey`:

```bash

> # the public part of the root key, for verifying notary's signatures

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# The public part of the root key, for verifying notary's signatures. Example:
```

Author: that is actually a copy/paste from the `helm/values.yaml`. I might just drop that line here, as it does not add value and is only confusing

Reviewer: We should in any case emphasize that the key given is an example.

  rootPubKey: |
    -----BEGIN PUBLIC KEY-----
    MFkwEwYHKoZIzj0CAQYIKoZIzj0DAQcDQgAEvtc/qpHtx7iUUj+rRHR99a8mnGni
    qiGkmUb9YpWWTS4YwlvwdmMDiGzcsHiDOYz6f88u2hCRF5GUCvyiZAKrsA==
    -----END PUBLIC KEY-----
```

And set `notary.isCosign` to `true`:

```bash
  isCosign: true
```

You can then install `Connaisseur` via:

```bash
make install
```

## Test Signature Verification

You can now test signature verification by deploying the signed image from above:

```bash

> kubectl run signed --image=<IMAGE>

Reviewer: `$IMAGE`

```

Or attempt to deploy another unsigned image.

> For the lazy ones, you can just configure our public key provided in the previous section and test with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the lazy ones, you can configure our public key provided in the previous section and test with:
```

    MFkwEwYHKoZIzj0CAQYIKoZIzj0DAQcDQgAEvtc/qpHtx7iUUj+rRHR99a8mnGni
    qiGkmUb9YpWWTS4YwlvwdmMDiGzcsHiDOYz6f88u2hCRF5GUCvyiZAKrsA==
    -----END PUBLIC KEY-----
```

And set `notary.isCosign` to `true`:

```bash
  isCosign: true
```

You can then install `Connaisseur` via:

```bash
make install
```

## Test Signature Verification

You can now test signature verification by deploying the signed image from above:

```bash
kubectl run signed --image=$IMAGE
```

Or attempt to deploy another unsigned image.

For the lazy ones, you can configure our public key provided in the previous section and test with our signed `testimage`:

```bash
kubectl run signed --image=docker.io/securesystemsengineering/testimage:co-signed
```

and compare to the unsigned `testimage`:

```bash
kubectl run unsigned --image=docker.io/securesystemsengineering/testimage:co-unsigned
```

or a `testimage` signed with a different key:

```bash
kubectl run unsigned --image=docker.io/securesystemsengineering/testimage:co-signed-alt
```

Once finished, you can clean up your cluster via:

```bash
make uninstall
```

## End

Hope you enjoy the new feature and let us [know what you think](../CONTRIBUTING.md)!

> We are working on improving support for `cosign` and `sigstore` features and will also be introducing [multi-key and multi-validator support](https://github.com/sse-secure-systems/connaisseur/pull/90) in the near future. So stay tuned!

Reviewer 3: If you link to #90 here, it becomes obsolete with merging #90, so #90 would need to touch this file, which is completly unrelated to its content, wouldn't link to specific stuff. If you want to do advertising for new features, I'd keep it more general

Author: Actually, I thought we would specifically in that case not have to touch this file, since if you open the closed PR, you know that it has been done. Can also remove it if it's unwanted...

Reviewer 3: The formulation with `will also be introducing` would still become wrong, I'd remove it, but also don't feel strongly about it, just noticed

Reviewer: I agree with @Starkteetje

Author: will drop it

```bash
git clone https://github.com/sse-secure-systems/connaisseur.git
cd connaisseur
```

Next, configure `conny` to use cosign and the previously created public key for validation via the `helm/values.yaml`.  To do so, copy your `cosign.pub` key into `notary.rootPubkey`:

```bash
# the public part of the root key, for verifying notary's signatures
  rootPubKey: |
    -----BEGIN PUBLIC KEY-----
    MFkwEwYHKoZIzj0CAQYIKoZIzj0DAQcDQgAEUU2/8oNKPRTVjnTPY4WwUNFXYke3
    CmpJpSaqBOFh92bdXZENv0AdR5qipqWxjGWO28Miyc2O6vGuoIyzzhQvuA==
    -----END PUBLIC KEY-----
```

And set `notary.isCosign` to `true`:

```bash
  isCosign: true
```

You can then install `conny` via:

```bash
make install
```

## Test Signature Verification

You can now test signature verification by deploying the signed image from above:

```bash
kubectl run signed --image=<IMAGE>
```

Or attempt to deploy another unsigned image.

For the lazy ones, you can just configure our public key provided in the previous section and test with:

```bash

> kubectl run signed --image=docker.io/xoph/ctest:signed

Reviewer 2: We should move the image to the other hub before we release

Author: yes, mentioned it as a task in the PR

Reviewer 2: ok :+1: I did see that but wanted to doublecheck whith regards to the time frame ;)

Author: it is done :rocket:
